Welcome.
So I was thinking about this
session over the weekend,
and it occurs to me that I've been
speaking at the USB session since 1998,
when I had more hair.
And what was notable about 1998
for me was that that was probably
the last year that Mac Week was
published in print form.
And Mac the Knife wrote
an article that said,
"Coming up to WWDC,
the session you've got to go to is USB."
And the room was absolutely packed.
Now, the room's not packed today.
And actually, I think that's okay,
because it really refers or relates
a lot to the maturity of the product.
Now, we're going to talk a lot
about where we're going.
We're going to talk about
some new things that we have.
But let's look at where
we've come since 1998,
at the dawn of USB,
when USB really only had two major
devices that were well-supported,
well-engineered,
and there were many of them.
You know what they were?
Keyboard devices.
So since then,
we've come up with mass storage devices,
modems, printers, networking devices,
cameras, digital steel cameras,
video cameras, and so forth.
So just as an overview for today,
I want to give you a progress
report on what we've been doing,
what's ahead.
We're going to have some
presentation on remote USB.
We have an I/O lab tomorrow.
The only thing that I would say about
this I/O lab is that it will be all
day long in the developer relations,
developer technical support lab,
except for the USB and
FireWire feedback form.
It wouldn't make much sense to
have you go to the lab when you
could come and give us feedback.
And then the beginning
of the day on Thursday,
Thursday night, we have the USB,
FireWire,
Bluetooth rendezvous plugfest at
the campus during the campus bash.
It's on top of the cafeteria in I/O lab.
the cafeteria in aisle four.
So what you'll learn today,
we will focus on what we've been
doing over the past year in Jaguar.
We're going to talk about the issues
that affect you as developers,
and of course we want your
feedback at the end of the
session to learn even more.
And really the most important thing
is the right way to write code,
the right way to write drivers,
the right way to design devices that
are going to get you the best behavior.
But there are some techniques that
you can use to match your devices to
drivers without writing any code at all.
These code-less texts just allow you
to put in the vendor and product ID and
match up to a device automatically.
So as you know, right now,
every single CPU we ship comes with
high-speed USB 2.0 – the Emacs,
the iMacs, the Powerbooks, PowerMacs,
etc.
The notable thing is that we've
added EHCI host controller support.
That's how we get high-speed USB.
They'll talk later on in what we're doing
to add even more controller support,
so I'll leave that surprise for them.
There are a number of robustness
fixes that we put in the 10.3 update.
And one thing that's very cool for us
is that if you remember where we got to
in the very final days of Mac OS 9.1,
9.2, 9.2.2, is we added its support
for USB UPS devices so that
you would automatically see
them on a desktop machine.
If you plug in a USB device,
a USB enabled UPS, it would automatically
appear as a battery device.
And that kind of support
is now present as well.
So with that,
let me bring up Fernando Urbino.
I will be talking about some new
APIs that we have added to our family,
some changes that we have made
to existing class drivers,
some of them based on feedback that we
got at last year's developers conference,
and finally I'm going to give
you an overview of new class
drivers that we have added,
especially we've added support to
the video device class specification,
the CDC Ethernet devices are
now supported and there are some
changes that we made there as well,
and finally we've added
support for UHCI controllers.
One of the new APIs that
we have implemented is the
timestamping of USB reads.
As most of you may know,
the callbacks from your drivers
are issued on the USB work loop.
This work loop can be delayed depending
on whether other high priority
threads are running in the system.
So if the USB transaction completes
on the bus and the hardware
notifies us at a certain time,
there could be a latency or some
amount of milliseconds before
your driver gets that callback.
This is what we call the
work loop latency issue.
We discovered that some clients,
including our head driver,
would sometimes like to know at what time
the hardware issued the interrupt and our
filter interrupt process that interrupt,
so that it could take care
of any delays that happened
before its callback was issued.
So we went ahead and added this new API.
It's very similar to one of the
existing IOUSB pipe read APIs.
The only difference is,
as it's highlighted,
is that we now have a IOUSB completion
with timestamp parameter instead
of just a regular IOUSB completion.
This timestamping is currently
implemented in your TigerSeed,
and it's only implemented
for interrupt and bulk reads.
We saw no reason to
implement it for writes,
but if you have a good or
invalid reason to do it,
let us know through the USB list or
at the feedback forum or down at the
Hardware I/O Lab tomorrow and Thursday,
and we'll consider and we might add it.
The I/O USB completion with
timestamp looks as so in the screen.
The action is the
different parameter there,
and it is an I/O USB completion
action with timestamp.
The way it works is that
your action routine,
or your callback essentially,
gets a new parameter.
In the past you've gotten, of course,
the status, the buffer size remaining,
and now you're going
to get the timestamp.
Again,
the timestamp is the time not when the
controller completed the transaction,
but where our filter interrupt routine,
which is our primary interrupt routine,
actually received that interrupt.
So there's a little delay there
between the hardware and the
filter interrupt routine running.
We now have an iOSB composite driver
instead of an Apple USB composite driver.
It is the same code,
however we've changed the name
because now we guarantee binary
compatibility in the future.
So we had recommended in the past
that if you needed the behavior
of the Apple USB composite driver,
that you go ahead and download
the family sources from Darwin and
do a copy and paste and generate
your own kernel extension.
Now we're allowing you to subclass
that driver so you have to write
less code and any bugs that we fix,
even though it's a fairly
straightforward driver,
you'll just get by default
instead of having stale code.
You would use this driver
if you need to customize the
startup behavior of your device.
The composite device,
the composite driver,
all it does is essentially generate
a set configuration on the bus and
the family actually instantiates
the USB interfaces for your device.
However,
sometimes the set configuration is not
enough and you want to do something else.
So you go ahead and subclass this
driver and add your code and that's it.
It is also,
or it also can be used to solve what we
call that root driver dependency problem.
And Rhodes will talk about
this in a little bit.
But essentially by overriding the set
configuration method of the driver,
you'll be able to solve this problem.
[Transcript missing]
I have an example here of subclassing
the interface user-client,
a class declaration for it.
It's very straightforward.
In this case, for this example,
I'm just going to override the
control request in method of
the interface user-client class.
This is a method used
when you want to read,
issue a device request to the device.
So it's from device to host.
This implementation of that
method shows how I go ahead
and intercept the USB stream.
First of all, at the top,
I need to decode the parameters of
the method into device request fields.
You can look at the USB family
sources to see how we did it,
but it's just like that.
All the different fields are
packed and encoded into UN32s.
Then, since it's a request from
the device to the host,
we first issue the
call to our superclass,
and that will cause the
transaction to go out on the bus.
Since it's a synchronous transaction,
it will return when that has completed.
Once it has completed, in this example,
I want to know whether the control
request was a printer class specific
get device ID request to interface zero,
alternate setting zero.
I go ahead and check those parameters.
If it is,
then I can do something with it.
In this example, I don't do anything,
but I could examine the buffer value
and see what the device returned
and do something to it again.
At the end, of course,
you've got to remember to return the
error that your superclass returned.
In the past, the user clients were called
actually I/O USB device user client
and I/O USB interface user client.
However, they were not subclassable,
and this goes against everything
that we've told since the beginning,
that if it was I/O USB,
it means it was subclassable.
Of course,
the headers were not available for you,
so you really couldn't subclass it.
And even if you copied the headers,
they said right there,
this is not intended to be subclassed.
Anyways, we're fixing that now.
What that means is that we're going to
guarantee binary compatibility in the
future if you subclass the user clients.
And there is sample code available
that is a complete example that
I just showed that compiles and works.
Couple of miscellaneous updates in
developing the video digitizer to support
the USB video class specification.
I realized that there were some
APIs that were exposed in the kernel,
but were not exposed to user space.
And so I went ahead and
implemented Find Next,
associated descriptor and
Find Next Alt Interface.
And those of you doing isochronous
drivers from user space might
find it handy to use those to
decode the descriptors instead
of having to do it all by hand.
One part that is really
not an external API change,
but it's an internal
implementation in the family,
is that the family now uses the command
sleep and command wake up IOK functions.
In the past,
those of you who have seen the sources,
we, we simulated synchronous commands to
the USB synchronous transactions by
using the IO Sync object from IO Kid.
And that allowed us to send a
command to the USB bus and sit
and wait for that command to
complete and then call our client.
That's how we simulated a synchronous
command on an asynchronous bus.
Buzz.
IO Sync has now been deprecated in
favor of command sleep and command wake.
This is a lot friendlier to the system.
It uses less resources.
It allows other things to
run in when you're command,
when you issue that command sleep,
which essentially puts
the thread to sleep.
And it also solves a bug that
we see every so often and that
we've talked in previous WWDCs,
and that is the problem that
you cannot issue a synchronous
command from your callback,
because you're on the I/O USB work loop,
and if you do,
you'll deadlock the bus and
nothing will work from there on.
There was no – you could do
that in previous versions and
you get no error or anything.
By using command sleep,
We will issue an error right away,
an immediate error,
of KIO USB sync request on
work loop thread to you,
so you'll know that your
synchronous requests did not work
and you won't deadlock the bus,
and it'll save us all some time.
Through the open source
process this past year,
we received a submission to
support the UHCI controller.
As you know,
we support OHCI from way back then,
and last year we added EHCI controllers.
But we've never added support for
UHCI controllers because Apple has never
shipped a machine with such a controller.
We received the submission,
we tweaked it a little
bit here and there,
and added it to our project.
And it is actually shipping and
available in your TigerSeed.
The purpose of this slide is just
to show you that the open source
submission really does work,
and that we take all
submissions seriously.
So we again encourage you
to download our sources,
and if you use them for something
that other people can use,
send it back to us and
we'll take it from there.
In terms of new device class support,
as I mentioned,
we have several or a couple
of new device class drivers.
Actually,
the 10.3.3 update included support
for USB-CDC Ethernet devices.
In the past,
this was just sample code that
was available on request from DTS,
but with 10.3.3,
it became part of the system.
However, as I'm going to mention
in a couple of slides,
for Tiger,
we now have a new USB-CDC driver that
supports modem and Ethernet-CDC devices.
And as some of you know,
last August the USB Implementers
Forum approved version 1.0 of the
USB Video Class Device specification,
and Tiger is going to add support
for some of that specification.
CDC class devices.
We've had support for
them since the beginning.
The driver in Mac OS X was essentially
ported from our Mac OS 9 driver.
It has worked well.
It's a device driver as
opposed to an interface driver.
It uses a fairly simple buffering model,
and it worked well for
low bandwidth CDC devices.
However,
new devices with higher bandwidth
and with multiple interfaces have
come into the market recently,
all of them CDC compliant.
And we realized that there was
a need to revamp this driver.
So we've gone and created this new
driver that is in your TigerSeed.
It supports devices that
have multiple interfaces,
not just the data interfaces,
but maybe mass storage and others.
It also has a multiple buffering
model to allow us to better
support the high bandwidth devices.
The new driver architecture
essentially looks like this.
At the device driver level,
we still have a device driver,
but it's a very simple device
driver that is essentially just the
equivalent of the composite driver.
It creates the interfaces and then
it causes either the ACM driver
for low bandwidth devices to be
instantiated for those interfaces,
or the ECM driver for the
high bandwidth devices.
So that works really well.
An example of how the CDC's
devices have changed is,
for example,
the third generation cell phones.
That can have a whole
series of USB interfaces,
and having the old driver that assumed
that all the interfaces were the
data communication interface would
certainly not work in this case.
You could have a hidden
interface for the keypad,
you can have mass storage
interface to access the card
where the pictures are stored.
Of course,
you can have the data interfaces,
you can have the Bluetooth interfaces.
And perhaps even audio
interfaces in there.
So you can see that CDC devices
have come a long ways,
and that is the reason for our change.
The USB video class was approved,
like I said, last August,
and I've been working with the device
working group for way before that.
The base specification itself is
Video format agnostic.
It just tells you what kind of
interfaces or what kind of functions,
video functions, that device supports,
how still image is supported,
whether it's bulk stream or
ISOC streams that are supported,
how the host and the device negotiate.
What kind of stream to
send and at what bandwidth?
It's very general in those terms.
The base spec itself is followed by
several payload specifications that
tell the driver/writer what the format
of the data that is encapsulated in
those streams looks like and how all the
information in there is to be decoded.
There's payload description
specifications for YUV 422,
a flavor of YUV 422,
and a flavor of Motion JPEG,
and those are mainly for
web camera situations.
DV is over USB spec in there,
MPEG-1 and MPEG-2.
So I encourage you,
if you're thinking about
video class devices,
to go and make a video
class compliant device.
device.
Tiger will have support for the
USB video class specification by using
a video digitizer that lives at library
QuickTime USB VDC digitizer component.
The software will support web cameras,
either in the motion
JPEG or the YUV 422 format.
It supports bulk and isochronous streams,
and right now cameras are shipping
with both kinds of streams,
even though the manufacturers actually
don't make a big deal that they
are VDC class compliant devices,
but they are shipping there,
as we'll show you in a little bit.
The still image support will be provided
through the image capture framework,
so that it is seamless to the user.
It will just look like another.
source of still pictures.
The spec actually is going
through some ongoing revisions to
further clarify the DV support,
so there is no DV support for
USB video class devices in Tiger.
Describing a video class device can be
a little tricky because they can have,
in this example of a digital
camera or a video camera,
you can have the video class interfaces,
you could have audio
interfaces for the microphone,
you can have mass storage interfaces for
the picture card that is in the machine.
So,
they needed a way to describe in terms
of the USB device descriptor how this
device looks so that host software
could readily find the particular
interfaces that are of its concern
and use them instead of having to
go through every single interface
and see what kind of interface it is.
So, the USB IEF came up with the
Interface Association Description.
This descriptor tells us at
the device level that it is a
miscellaneous class device with a
common subclass and an interface
association descriptor protocol.
This just tells the device driver that
you need to look into the configuration
descriptor for the interface
association descriptor that follows,
which is going to group the
different functional interfaces.
This just tells the device driver that
you need to look into the configuration
descriptor for the interface
association descriptor that follows,
which is going to group the
different functional interfaces.
And if we can go to the demo machine,
I will show you how the device
will be able to do this.
And if we can go to the demo machine,
I will show you how the device
will be able to do this.
Here we have a Panasonic video
class-specific compliant device.
I'm going to turn it on and
start USB Prover and look
at the camera right here.
You can see that the device is
a miscellaneous common class
interface association descriptor.
Here on the configuration descriptor,
we see that there are one and two
interface association descriptors.
One for the video interface collection
and one for the audio collection.
If we disclose one of those,
it just tells us that the first
interface is interface number zero,
and there are two interfaces,
and furthermore, then it tells us that it
is the video subclass.
We go down here and now
look at the audio control.
The first interface is 2,
and there's again two interfaces for the
audio control and the audio streaming,
and the class is the audio class.
So this is just a way for the device
to tell us what functions it supports,
and our drivers can then match.
And in fact, for this camera,
we can see that
The driver has the video
control interface and the
video streaming interface,
and then there's the audio,
Apple USB audio device and
engine matching to the device.
[Transcript missing]
And this one is right down here.
And in this case,
it doesn't have a microphone,
so there will only be one
video interface collection.
But we can start a video
capture application,
and you can see that...
That support is real and it's there.
And we are continuing to... Oh,
I didn't want to do that.
We're continuing to support all the
cameras that we can get a hold of.
The support now is such that
new cameras that have come in,
I haven't had to change
the driver at all,
so we're getting there.
I believe that that is
the end of the demo,
and if we can go to the – Rhoaads
will now come and talk to you
about some other USB issues.
I want to talk to you about
some of the issues that have
come up in the last year.
These are issues that have come up in
our own internal driver development
and on the USB developer mailing list.
I'm going to talk about
three specific things.
One is what I call the split
transaction error problem.
These are USB errors with full speed
or low speed devices attached through
a high speed hub to a high speed bus.
Then another issue that's
more of an I/O Kit issue,
but we call it Apple USB Composite
Stole My Device.
This is an issue that has come up quite
frequently with third-party developers.
And then another one called
My Device Gets the Wrong Config,
which is more rare,
but an interesting solution.
So first we're going to talk about
the split transaction errors.
So what you have here is a
picture that's sort of adapted
from the USB 2.0 specification,
Appendix A, Table A-12.
Here is a – what we're going to go
through here is a split transaction
between the high-speed host,
a high-speed hub,
and then a full-speed or low-speed
device attached to that hub.
So let's say the host needs to send some
data out to the classic speed device.
So it first sends a start split
token to the high-speed host.
So it sends a start split token to
the high-speed hub saying I have a
command for a classic speed device,
followed by the out or setup packet.
That's what the Table A-12 will show you,
followed by the data.
And the high-speed hub
acknowledges that data transfer.
Now the high-speed hub needs
to send the data to the device.
So first it sends the out setup packet,
followed by the data.
But in this example,
the device either ignores the data,
does not respond to it in any way,
or it sends the data to the device,
and then the device ignores the data.
So it sends the data to the device,
and then the device ignores the data,
or it sends the data to the device,
or never gets the data
for an electrical problem,
or because it is physically disconnected,
or for some other reason.
And that happens three times in a row.
So finally,
the host wants to find out what
happened to that data packet,
so it sends a complete
split command to the hub,
identifies which complete
split it's looking for,
and gets a response of stall
from the high-speed hub.
So that's one example.
Now we're going to go to another
example and compare them.
So in this example,
this is table A-23 from
the USB 2.0 specification.
And in this example,
the same situation – the
host sends the start split,
followed by the out or setup packet,
followed by the data,
and gets acknowledged.
The high speed hub then sends
the out setup packet and
sends the data to the device.
This time, the device gets the data,
but it doesn't like it,
so it returns a stall PID.
Later on,
the host wants to find out what happened.
It sends the complete split,
it identifies the complete split,
and it gets a stall back
from the high-speed hub.
Now I'm going to show you the
other table here on the next slide.
I want you to pay close attention
to the information on the
left-hand side of the screen.
When we go back to Table A-12,
you'll notice that the
left-hand side did not change.
Let's go back to the other one again.
It didn't change.
What this means is that from a
controller point of view in the host,
we can't tell the difference between
the situation where the device did not
get the data and the situation where the
device got the data but didn't like it.
So, what does your driver need to do?
Well, first of all,
you need to realize that "stall" does
not always mean "stall." It may mean
that the device stalled the data,
and it may mean that the
device didn't respond at all,
so the high-speed hub stalls the command.
What we have done with this in the
USB family is when this situation occurs,
we will return an error of
KIOUSB pipe stall the first time
we see it on a particular pipe,
and the third time, and the fifth time,
and all the odd times.
But on the even times,
we will return a different error
– KIO return not responding.
So that hopefully if you issue
the command twice in a row,
one of the two errors will
cause your driver to know
what to do with the situation.
When this happens, no matter which of the
two situations occurs,
the endpoint is halted
inside the host controller.
It needs to be cleared,
at least in the host end,
and possibly in the device end,
but we don't know that.
The device may or may not
have a halted endpoint,
and your driver needs to figure it out.
It needs to ask the device,
it needs to reset the device,
it needs to do something to
deal with this situation.
But you need to realize that this is
something that is different between
classic speed USB on an OHCI bus and
classic speed USB on a high speed bus.
And you need to deal
with it appropriately.
Okay, another issue that has come up
and we wanted to talk about,
and this is more of an I/O Kit thing,
but we've done some stuff
to help solve it here,
is the – we call it
Apple USB Composite Stole My Device.
Now what does this mean?
This is when you have a device
driver for an I/O USB device nub,
as opposed to an interface driver.
Again,
this is something we encourage people to
use the composite driver when they can,
but let's say you have your own
device driver for some reason,
and you need that.
And so you create a personality
for your I/O USB device,
and it's specified here,
and you plug in your device
and you open up USB Prober,
and sure enough, there's your driver,
instantiated, controlling this device.
And that's great.
Everything's wonderful.
But then, when you reboot the machine,
you open up Prober again,
and this time the Apple USB Composite
driver is installed.
So the composite driver is
now controlling your device
instead of your own driver.
And if you unplug the
device and plug it back in,
you'll see that your own
driver is controlling it again.
So you ask yourself, well,
why did the Apple USB Composite
driver match against my device?
So you download the family
sources from Darwin,
and you open up the
Apple USB Composite target,
and you notice this property:
OS bundle required of root.
And you ask us on the list,
or the I/O Kit list, "Well,
what does that mean?"
In the system,
there are certain kernel extensions and
the kernel itself that are listed with
an OS bundle required property of root.
There are a few other
OS bundle required properties,
but this is sort of the main one.
These are kernel extensions
that are required to run very,
very, very early in the system,
to do things like enable you to go
into single user mode or verbose mode,
that kind of thing.
We want to be able to type on a keyboard,
for example, in single user mode.
So these kernel extensions are things
like the Mach text itself and the
I/O Kit and the USB family and the
various controller drivers and so forth.
And one of them is Apple USB Composite.
So this is a root driver,
it loads very early in the system.
But then there are other kernel
extensions that are not root drivers.
For example, the I/O Serial family,
or the I/O Audio family,
or some other family that your kernel
extension needs to link against
in order to be resolved and load.
So what that means, of course,
is that if you have to link against a
driver that's not available at root time,
you can't be available at root time.
So what do you do?
What we came up with was a clever
solution that we call the poison pill.
And in this solution,
you create an interface driver
for your I/O USB interface object.
And here is a personality
for that driver.
And then inside that interface
driver in the start method,
you just call re-enumerate device,
which causes your device to
get essentially disconnected
and reconnected from the bus.
Your interface driver,
not being a root driver,
will load once the
system is fully booted,
and when it causes the
device re-enumeration,
again, it's like physically disconnecting
and reconnecting the device,
and now your device driver,
which has a higher matching priority
than the composite device driver,
will win the matching process.
Now, this solution does have
a couple of caveats,
one of which is that your device driver,
which might be a subclass of the
new I/O USB composite driver,
for example,
needs to call set configuration
with a parameter of false to
prevent I/O Kit from matching
drivers against the interface nubs,
or else you get into a loop
where it's just constantly
re-enumerating the device.
However, preventing I/O Kit from matching
the interface nubs will also
prevent I/O USB interface
user-client from matching,
which means that if you need
a user-client for your device,
you need to do a little more work.
Finally, I'm going to talk about a
situation that has come up.
We call it "my device gets the wrong
config." This is where you have a device,
an I/O USB device, that has more than one
configuration descriptor.
And the composite driver
does everything you want.
It's a composite device, i.e.
the device class and device
subclass are both zero.
And the Apple USB composite
driver does a good job,
except for it picks the
wrong configuration,
because the composite driver always
picks the first configuration.
And you want an alternate configuration
to be instantiated for your device
under certain circumstances.
Well,
You don't need to write
any code to do this.
You can create a codeless
kernel extension,
where all you need is a file
with a personality in it,
a property list.
And this property list specifies your
device by vendor ID and product ID,
as you can see,
and specifies that you want to load
the Apple USB Composite bundle and
instantiate the Apple USB Composite
class to match against your device.
You then add one more property,
in blue at the bottom of the list,
called preferred configuration,
and you specify the configuration number
of the configuration that you want,
and the Apple USB Composite driver
will then load that configuration.
This same technique of creating a
codeless KEXT can be used if you
have a vendor-specific device,
i.e.
the device class and
subclass are FF instead of 0,
but other than that,
the device really will behave
just like a composite device,
and you want the Apple USB Composite
driver to load against this device.
And with that,
I'm going to bring up Barry Twycross
to talk about remote USB.
Thanks Rhos.
Okay,
so I'm going to talk about remote USB.
What is it?
Why you would want to do this?
How it's done?
And then the interesting part,
what it actually means to you.
Remote USB – what is it?
It's when you use a device which is
not actually attached to your computer.
Ah, but you say, this is not USB, is it?
Well, no, it's pretending to be USB.
However, users do it anyway,
so you might as well be prepared for it.
Remote USB.
Why would you want to do this?
Well, there is user demand.
Users like to share their peripherals.
A classic example is...
is a printer.
They want one in the household,
everyone in the household
can print to the one printer.
They also like to unwire,
so they can be sitting comfortably
on their couch in the living room,
print something off to their printer,
and never have to get up at all,
except when they actually go to
get the print out from the printer.
It's also a business opportunity.
You can sell devices which
implement remote USB.
Users will buy them from you.
And it's actually quite a
common developer question.
And here's an example from
the USBIF's mailing list,
where this guy says, I'm a student,
I have a project,
I want to cut the wire on my USB,
put radio transceivers at both ends,
and will it work?
Well,
the answer to that was basically no.
Let's think about the problem
a little more rationally.
Let's try using networking concepts.
Networking is the standard way of
getting data from here to there,
and we want to get data
from here to there.
Also, decouple the transport of the
data from the data itself.
So if you want to do it wirelessly,
don't worry that you
want to do it wirelessly.
Do it with a network,
and then use a wireless network.
It can be wireless this way.
So we'll use TCP/IP,
it being the commonly
available networking.
It's built into all our machines.
Everyone knows and loves it.
So we need to think about the
data flow that's involved in USB,
intercept it at some point,
and then send it across the network
to a device which takes it and then
sends it on to the actual USB device.
So, the data flow.
And you start off at the
top with the application.
Here's an example of printing again.
You start off with the application,
it sends data to the print driver,
it bubbles down through the user client,
and eventually ends up with a controller,
and actually then ends
up on the USB bus itself,
and finally with a device.
We thought of three interesting
places where you could
actually intercept this data,
basically at a very high level,
at a very low level,
and somewhere in between.
So, let's think about high level.
An example is, in fact,
airport extreme printing.
The application in this case is, in fact,
the print manager,
and the print driver's I/O module,
instead of sending it to USB,
sends it across the network
to the device – well,
in this case,
an airport extreme base station,
which sends it down through its own
USB stack to the printer itself.
Now, doing this at a high level has
a big disadvantage in that the
application itself is required
to know what it's doing.
It needs to know that it's
talking to a network service.
So, it's incompatible with most
solutions which are out there.
However,
it has a very big advantage in that
protocols exist to do this already.
In particular,
the two big issues here are
discovery and session management.
You want to find out what devices
or what services are available
to actually use out there.
That's discovery.
We have lots of interesting protocols,
including Rendezvous,
which they always like
us to plug for you.
And the other problem
is session management.
You only want one person
talking to your device at once,
otherwise your device
gets mightily confused.
Thank you.
So, as you don't want to get your
device mightily confused,
you have to have some way of managing
who talks to the device at one time.
The person talking to the device is
in fact a session in networking speak,
and you just need to manage this.
That's session management.
So, we were thinking, okay,
let's do Airport Extreme,
let's do remote printing
with a USB printer.
We thought it was the
perfect application.
We actually own the application,
so we can put the knowledge of how
to do this into the application,
the application being the
printer driver itself.
And we also own the networking,
we own the base station,
so it seemed like the
perfect application.
So, we went ahead,
we added a host controller,
we added a USB stack, we added a...
[Transcript missing]
Fine.
But we found that the feature set of this
protocol was not actually rich enough.
Print drivers wanted to do
things such as soft reset,
getting of the printer ID string,
and in fact getting the entronic status,
which the protocol didn't allow for.
The printer module was faked to
actually help with this to some extent,
and then there's a new print module in
Panther which does an even better job,
but still, in all circumstances,
it doesn't work.
There'll be more about that later.
Another idea we had,
let's try an intermediate level.
In fact, the user client.
With the user client,
you're already passing messages
across a hard boundary,
which is from user
space into kernel space,
so why not instead just pass
those messages across the network
to a device which can receive
them and do exactly what the user
client on your local Mac would do.
In this case,
send data down to the printer.
Sounds like a very good idea.
To some extent,
discovery and session management
are already built into this.
When you iterate through
available user clients,
or when you iterate through
available interfaces,
you're actually doing
discovery of some description.
And when you open a device, use a device,
close a device, that is in fact a crude
form of session management.
Sounds like a good idea,
and it still is only an
idea as far as we know.
No one has ever done this.
At the other end of the
scale is at a low level.
An example of this is the
Keyspan remote USB server.
I was very surprised in January.
I walked into Macworld,
came up to the Keyspan booth and thought,
"Oh, that was interesting." They had
in fact made a device which had a
USB controller attached to the network.
And indeed, the data bubbled down
through the system as usual.
The host controller driver said, "Here,
Mr.
Wim, please send this data to
the USB." And in fact,
that Wim does send the data to the USB,
but the USB happens to be somewhere else.
At this very low level,
it's actually quite a
lot more compatible.
Nothing in the system
actually has to be aware that
At this very low level,
it's actually quite a
lot more compatible.
Nothing in the system
actually has to be aware that
At this very low level,
it's actually quite a
lot more compatible.
Nothing in the system actually
has to be aware that it searches
for all the devices on them and
makes them available on the list.
The user can click on one and say,
"I want to use this now."
And they also had to add some
session management to this.
They have various methods,
some of which work for some applications,
like the open, print, close,
some of which don't.
Like if you have a mass storage device,
it's always attached.
The mass storage driver doesn't open,
print, and close.
It opens and uses forever.
So there's various methods of doing that.
that.
This means that the user experience
is not exactly as seamless
as you might want it to be.
So they're actually looking at putting
in some higher-level protocols,
say add a print server to the USB server,
or a mass storage file server,
something like that,
just to overcome the disadvantage
of being at such a low level.
So what does this all mean to you?
There are two very big issues
with any implementation like this:
latency and throughput.
These are quite tightly coupled,
in that when your latency increases,
your throughput tends to decrease.
Some protocols we find are
very sensitive to latency,
specifically ones where
you do actions serially,
you ask the device something,
wait for a reply before you
ask the device something again.
An example is, say,
the mass storage protocol.
You send it a command,
you wait for that to be acknowledged,
you send it some data,
you wait for the data to be acknowledged,
then you ask it for the status,
and the status comes back to you.
At each stage you're
waiting for something,
if there is latency in the system,
that just
[Transcript missing]
We find that in some cases,
driver timeouts are too aggressive.
One printer driver was found
to have a two-second timeout.
Locally, it didn't tend to time out,
but across a network,
it was timing out all the time.
If you have such an aggressive timeout,
you could find that it
could happen to you locally.
So this is not actually a good idea.
If your bus was heavily loaded,
if Nano's webcam was turned
on using 90% of the bus,
the 10% you have left works a
hell of a lot slower than you
thought it was going to be,
your data doesn't go out and come back,
you time out, the user isn't happy.
So timeouts which are set too
aggressive are not a good thing.
Another thing:
Do use a standard component
if it's available.
For example,
using the Apple-supplied printer module,
so that it can then take the
data and send it across the
network and everything's happy.
In general,
if you're using a standard component,
we can fix it, you don't have to.
But in the case of the printer,
we found that the feature
set wasn't rich enough,
and in particular for printer utilities.
They're very picky about what they do,
and they don't tend to work, say,
with the airport extreme printing.
So if you want to declog
the head on your printer,
you actually have to
go and plug in locally.
There's actually not a
lot we can do about this,
except we can ask you
to provide feedback.
If you find that any component we
supply doesn't actually meet your need,
then we can actually rev it at some time,
and eventually it will meet your need,
and then everything will be happy.
So, some things you want to do:
Be standard.
to a standard,
not to any particular implementation.
Don't say it works on that system
so it should work on your system.
If you design to a standard,
it should work on any system.
And if you did design to a standard
and it doesn't work on a system,
then the system vendor will probably
be motivated to actually fix it.
And have a standard.
That's a very good one.
Or even have a well-defined standard.
Some of the problems we're having is
that there is no standard for this or
that the standard does not define what
a device should do in this circumstance
so it does something quite unexpected.
For example,
don't overload a standard that exists.
Like we found that some printers,
in fact, would change their device
ID string to provide status.
We were expecting the device ID string
to be static so we'd read it once,
send it over,
and never bother sending it over again.
and some printers just refused to print
because they were getting stale status.
We fix that.
Don't expect everything.
Say if you have a compound
or composite device,
don't expect to get all of
the interfaces or all of the
devices in that compound device.
Just use the one that you actually need.
For example, you say you had a device
which was a printer,
a scanner, and a modem,
but you wanted to print something.
If the printer either freaked out,
if it found the scanner wasn't there,
even if it only wanted to print,
That could be embarrassing if you
just told your remote USB to actually
just attach to the printer and not
to the scanner and the modem as well.
And also,
be optimal locally in your data transfer.
If you transfer data optimally,
even just locally, well that's good,
and then when you get into a situation
where the network adds its latencies,
you'll find that you'll be
in a much better position.
For example, using multiple reads
or multiple transfers,
and using larger transfers.
Let the system do the work of
actually getting the data there,
rather than your driver
trying to do all the work.
And one final point,
which I'm not sure if
it's a good thing or not,
is whether you should post a read.
If you have a readout
standing on a device,
you'll know as soon as it tells
you that it has something to say.
However, on some of the earlier systems,
some of the slower systems,
having a readout standing like that,
doing nothing,
uses up a lot of the bus bandwidth,
and the entire system
can actually slow down,
which is not a good thing.
So, whether this is a good thing or
not is left to your conscience.
So, with this,
where should you go for more information?
Well, Craig is a good person to talk to,
at least ask him who
else he should talk to,
or indeed send stuff to our mailing list.
We like to hear from you.
Yeah, we like to hear from you.
And some pointers to documentation
on the web page you might
be interested in seeing.
This reference is available somewhere,
I'm not quite sure where.